---
title: 'Youth Unemployment Records 43.8%: Democracy Promise Still Unmet After '
date: 2012-08-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---

The month of June not only marks the arrival of winter in the southern hemisphere but also signifies the coming together of South Africans in celebrating the so-called “goal for Africa”, achieved by Siphiwe Tshabalala on June 11 in the 2010 soccer World Cup held in South Africa. This was a unifying time for both South Africans and Africans alike, however, June is also Youth Month, remembering the tragic death of many youth on 16 June 1976 in the Soweto uprising. While celebrating and reflecting on the youth of yesteryear, current youth are confronted by one of the biggest challenges: the increasing unemployment level. Data obtained from Statistics South Africa indicates that in the first quarter of 2024 the rate of unemployment amongst the age group 25 to 34 years was 43.8%, which makes for a continuation of the narrative of persistent joblessness.

Youth Unemployment: The Most Pressing Challenge

One word jumps out at young people today when asked what their biggest challenge is: “unemployment”, which continues to show a  troubling upward trend. The average youth unemployment rate for the population group between 25 and 34 years old was 24.28% in the early years of democracy (1994 to 2003), but has increased significantly for the period 2004 to 2013 to 35.37%. This spike was caused by several factors, such as South Africa's transition from labour-intensive primary to skills-intensive tertiary sectors, weak economic development, and the global financial crisis of 2008. Tight labour laws have also made it difficult for businesses to operate and increase employment rates. 

For the period 2014 to 2024, the trend persisted with an average rate of 45.22%. Even with efforts to improve education and training, there remained a gap between the competencies that companies required and the abilities that young people possessed. During this period, there was minimal economic growth, far lower than the 5% outlined in the National Development Plan. This led to limited employment opportunities, resulting in further pressure on the youth.  For example, for the first quarter of 2024 youth unemployment reached a rate of 43.8%, with 65% of that being women. Stories of unmet hope, unrealised potential, and institutional barriers abound for the youth of South Africa. On a community level, this is exacerbated by the impact on challenges related to community cohesion, financial advancement, and prospects for future generations.

Impact of Youth Unemployment on Youth Wellbeing 

It is evident that the youth are greatly impacted by high unemployment. Youth unemployment triggers the inability of many young adults to provide for their families and make ends meet. On the other hand, youth unemployment presents financial constraints, and as such, young people are not able to invest in their own growth, pursue further education, and access healthcare amongst other things. Furthermore, financial strain may cause many young people to drop out of school or postsecondary education, which in turn compromises their chances of obtaining long-term work and upward economic mobility. Young people without work struggle financially and this affects them on both a social and personal level. Unemployment may cause high levels of stress, and worry and depression afflict this age group, which in turn adversely affects their overall quality of life, confidence, and sense of self. High rates of youth unemployment also contribute to a sense of social exclusion. As such many young people struggle to engage in meaningful social activities or fully participate in society. This results in loneliness, and low social cohesion. On the other hand, criminal activity may increase in the communities that are characterised by prominent levels of youth unemployment.  

South Africa's Ten-Year Initiatives to Address Unemployment via Policy

There has been a significant amount of legislation passed in the last ten years to address unemployment in South Africa. While the Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative for South Africa (ASGISA) framework was adopted in 2006, it did not achieve the targets of reducing unemployment and poverty by half in 2014. On the other hand, although the National Youth Development Agency (NYDA), established in 2009, has helped the youth to find vocations and acquire skills, it has faced financial constraints. Furthermore, while inclusive growth has been prioritised under the National Growth Path (NGP), fiscal constraints have deterred it from achieving its employment targets by 2020. To further help youth find jobs, the Youth Employment Service (YES) was launched in 2018. The programme offers training in various sectors including IT, green economy, and manufacturing and includes specialised training hubs like the Drone Academy and other centres focused on modern and sustainable industries. The Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Programme (ERRP) that was begun due to the impact of COVID-19 further seeks to improve growth and employment and the Employment Tax Incentive, initiated in 2020, facilitates youth employment, albeit more actions may be necessary to solve greater structural issues.

Global Lessons for South Africa to Reduce Youth Unemployment

Several nations have become worldwide leaders in the fight against youth unemployment by putting creative, locally specific policies into practice through a combination of forward-thinking policies and strong educational and vocational systems. Countries such as Austria, the Netherlands, and Singapore, use a broad-based national score to measure and track the performance of various economic sectors. As such at any point in time these nations know what skills there a shortage of in real time and young people can make informed decisions about what to study and skills that are needed in real time, which results in a rapid reduction in unemployment rates. The policies in Austria in the labour market are active, targeted, and aimed at helping job seekers improve their employability and skills; the flexible labour market in the Netherlands beckons companies to foster talent in youth by means of career counselling and bonuses; and Singapore encourages lifelong learning by adapting its courses to the needs of the sector and offering financial support to attract and train young people.

Government Budgetary Implication on Reducing Youth Unemployment 

The Department of Employment and Labour implemented a new National Minimum Wage (NMW) from the 1st of March 2024 and announced that the NMW would increase from R25.42 to R27.58 per hour. This works out to a salary of R220.64 per day (assuming 8 hours worked) and estimated to be R 80533.6 annually per person. The grand total annual minimum wage figures needed for the government to assist a workforce of 4,509,000 unemployed youth, is more than R363.1bn. In 2023, the nominal gross domestic product (GDP) at market prices grew by R342 billion to R6.97 trillion. Given these figures, the government would need to allocate an additional approximate 5.21% of GDP to finance youth employment initiatives. However, this adjustment is complicated by elevated levels of government debt and limited fiscal space. To address the persistent issue of unemployment effectively, it is essential to explore alternative sources of investment. 

Minimum wage laws demonstrate an intention to elevate the standard of living of workers. However, the increase of the NMW also presents a fiscal policy and monetary policy imbalance given an increase of 8.49% which exceeds the upper bound of the inflation target of 6%. From the fiscal policy point and trade unions this may be viewed as a good step towards reducing pay inequalities and increasing the financial security of workers in the short term. However, fiscal authorities need to consider that the NMW increase has a long-term dual effect on fiscal balance of government expenditure and tax revenue. On one hand the NMW may increases tax revenues and stimulate economic growth as citizens spends. On the other hand, it could lead to job losses as labour costs rise, leading to losses for small companies and industries with low profit margins. This could potentially strain government finances if unemployment rises as social spending needs to increase. Therefore, before the NMW increase fiscal authorities need to have long-term plan on how to finance the increase in the NMW without using debt and increasing taxes. Therefore, this may mean fiscal authorities need to move back towards state-owned companies and come up with strategies that work more effectively, especially in the energy sector. It may be expected that to be effective in the energy sector businesses will be in operation and be able to absorb young people. On the other hand, thus reducing the fiscal burden on the government. The NWM has been found to have a significant impact on the unemployment rate. However, at the sectoral level, such as in manufacturing and agriculture, the impact is significant.

The creation of employment cannot be solely the responsibility of the government. A multi-faceted approach that includes business incentives, public-private partnerships, and reduced regulatory burdens can significantly contribute to job creation, job security, and better wages. Governments can encourage innovation and entrepreneurship by reducing taxes and eliminating all but the simplest of rules for new and small enterprises. This can also be achieved through public-private partnerships for catalysing employment intensive mega projects. For instance, the skills and resources in the public and private sector could be combined in a way that executes infrastructure projects more efficiently and effectively. This increases employment in the long-term use of the workforce. There is therefore a need for co-ordinated assistance to improve training and skills development, which are both essential to ensure that the workforce meets the demands of a modern economy. 

When South Africa transitioned to democracy in 1994, it came with significant promises aimed at improving the lives of its citizens. These promises included economic growth and job creation which would be reflected in z commitment to robust economic growth that would create jobs and reduce unemployment. The persistent and escalating issue of youth unemployment in South Africa, as evidenced by the 43.8% unemployment rate among the 25 to 34 age group in the first quarter of 2024, suggests that the promises of democracy remain unmet even after 30 years. Despite numerous legislative initiatives and programs designed to alleviate the crisis, the continuous rise in youth unemployment rates indicates that the socio-economic goals set during the transition to democracy have not been fully realized.
The Way Forward

To solve youth unemployment and related concerns, South Africa must develop a comprehensive approach that might involve some of the following:

•	Provide salary subsidies to businesses to attract young workers. 
•	Promoting different sectors can mitigate the impact of wage increases on specific businesses by expanding job possibilities across multiple industries. 
•	Consider the economic and job implications of the compensation increase.
•	Improve tax collection efficiency to increase money and fund economic and social projects. 
•	Launch neighbourhood-based activities to foster young leadership development, mentoring, and community service opportunities. 
•	Invest in education and training to prepare people for higher-paying opportunities and minimise their reliance on low-wage jobs. 
•	Provide financial and technical help to small and medium-sized businesses as they adjust.
•	Create neighbourhood-based programmes that help young people gain leadership, mentorship, and community service experience. 
•	Make educational and training investments to help people become less dependent on low-paying employment and to position them for higher-paying opportunities. 

In conclusion, South Africa's persistent youth unemployment has significant social, political, and economic implications. The situation is serious; youth unemployment rates have consistently increased over time, despite numerous legislative initiatives and programmes designed to alleviate the crisis. Aside from causing personal sorrow, youth unemployment has a significant negative impact on possibilities for future growth, financial advancement, and community togetherness. To alleviate this, collaboration across different sectors of the economy and social levels is required. By implementing these proposals, the country may establish a more dynamic and inclusive economy, lowering youth unemployment and its associated challenges.

By Dr Eugene Msizi Buthelezi
nGAP Lecturer at the University of Free State 
The views presented here are mine, they do not represent the views and policy position of the institution with which I am affiliated. I do this for community outreach as a person in academics only.

Reference 

Baines, G. (2007). The master narrative of South Africa's liberation struggle: Remembering and forgetting June 16, 1976. The International Journal of African Historical Studies, 40(2): 283-302.
Behar, A. (2006). ASGISA and JIPSA: Will those who remain unskilled also get to share. Conference on Accelerated and Shared Growth in South Africa: Determinants, Constraints and Opportunities.	
Bienert, J., et al. (2018). Skills, entrepreneurship and new business models: Ways to rejuvenate the German industrial model, IW-Policy Paper.
De Faoite, D., et al. (2003). Education and training for entrepreneurs: a consideration of initiatives in Ireland and The Netherlands. Education+ Training, 45(8/9): 430-438.
De Jongh, J. J. (2019). Understanding the drivers of long-term youth unemployment: Micro-level evidence from South Africa. Proceedings of International Academic Conferences, International Institute of Social and Economic Sciences.
DEL (2024). Minister Thulas Nxesi announces National Minimum Wage for 2024. M. T. N. a. N. M. W. f. 2024. Laboria House 215 Francis Baard Street PRETORIA: https://www.gov.za/news/media-statements/government-activities/minister-thulas-nxesi-announces-national-minimum-wage.
Gumede, V., et al. (2024). Socio-economic transformation in South Africa. South African Economy: Trails and Possibilities, Springer: 51-88.
Jones, R. S. and J. Beom (2022). Policies to increase youth employment in Korea.
Jubane, M. (2020). Strategies for reducing youth unemployment in South Africa. Jubane, Marvelous, Strategies for reducing Youth Unemployment in South Africa (April 28, 2021).
Mazorodze, B. T. (2020). Youth unemployment and murder crimes in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Cogent Economics & Finance, 8(1): 1799480.
Morgan, A. L. (2013). An Assessment of Youth Development from the National Youth Commission to the National Youth Development Agency, University of the Witwatersrand, Faculty of Commerce, Law and Management ….
Pooe, K. and W. Ngcaweni (2022). When theory and policy miss the transformational opportunity: South Africa's untapped informal sector potential for addressing youth unemployment.  Journal of Public Administration, 57(3): 421-439.
StaSA (2024). Quarterly Labour Force Survey Quarter 1: 2024. Retrieved 07-06-2024, from https://www.statssa.gov.za/publications/P0211/P02111stQuarter2024.pdf.


Headings are cool
======

You can have many headings
======

Aren't headings cool?
------
